# The Beacon
## 19th December 2022 • Mali, West Africa

Barreling down the track and yelling up at the sky above whilst she drove, Aeve realised that she couldn’t find the stars. Yet in central Mali you could always see them, they were unavoidable features of the landscape at night. Stars often materialised hovering above the desert as a fractured, luminescent metropolis with trillions of little bulbs and microscopic fractals which lay in wait, ready for someone to trace lines between them all.

How long had Aeve been swearing at the clouds? She couldn’t say. In any case, if the clouds were listening then they were certainly unmoved by her florid taunts, remaining stoic even when things escalated into an unforgivable stream of accusations as Aeve blamed the clouds for everything, her voice clear over the Jeep’s engine and the tired, rusty *clunk* of gears twirling inside. Although soon enough her calls trailed off into whispers and after a short while her threats gave way to hopeful prayers, she continued to scan the unoccupied desert for clouds.

These movements caused the Jeep to dangerously swing from one side of the track to the other, yet regaining control of the vehicle Aeve noticed that the surrounding darkness was stacked with enough danger, she knew the stories well. Bandits roamed these desert highways waiting to pounce on the researchers that moved back and forth between villages. Gangs of ex-soldiers, deserted militia and paramilitary units, alongside a company of rebel groups had been said to camp in the surrounding fields,  patrolling the landscape for movement of any kind, searching for an easy late-night meal. In spite of the track she had been speeding through in the darkness, and the fact that Aeve had only caught about two hours of sleep, it was still far too dangerous for her to be driving so recklessly.

A few moments later Aeve watched the foreground and the background merge into a fluid, mushy silhouette and she peered into this liquid shadow for monsters but it was worse than she could imagine—an invisible army of nightmares were squinting right back. Silently, effortlessly, like clowns creeping out of a toy car they appeared before her. As this mirage took shape Aeve remembered hiking around the lab early one morning to find a platoon of camouflaged men bursting out from the other side of a hedgerow. These ghostly pale soldiers weren’t anything like the others she’d heard so many tales about, however their French citizenship had somehow failed to calm her nerves. For Aeve, *men with guns* would now, forever and always remain to be simply *men with guns*. But suddenly the faces vanished without warning into a half-cone of light from the Jeep which brightened the track ahead. ‘Screw it,’ Aeve thought ‘there isn’t a single broken headlamp or monster out there that’s crazy enough to mess with me tonight.’

Because tonight was special. 

An unpredictable rainstorm was inbound, clouds in the horizon building, humidity in the air fluctuating with every breath. From her small apartment earlier that evening she could feel these atmospheric movements in her bones, just like it’s said of experienced pilots and their planes; how the rudder, the fuselage, the propellors and even how the tips of their wings soon become extensions of the pilot’s body. For months Aeve had been dreaming about the uninhabited space up there in the Malian troposphere; from cirrus and altostratus clouds to their distant cumulonimbus friends, they were all unwelcome guests in the skies above Mali. Hence sometime ago, as the rickety wooden floorboards stretched beneath her feet, Aeve thought that she could detect the slightest fluctuations in air pressure and the palpitating, beautiful puffy little rain clouds that were sleeping just outside.

Aeve’s senses adjusted themselves to consciousness as a call had buzzed her out of bed with a loud and incoherent message which crackled from her phone. “...are you there? Where the hell are you? I’ve been looking all over for you!” Eventually she could recognise the flittering voice on the other end as her team leader, Hendrik Jan Botha, as it was impossible to misplace his South African accent. “I’ve no idea where Felix is and we have this storm rolling in. Don’t—” Hendrik’s voice cut to silence as Aeve hung up. Holding the phone tightly in her hands, she thought *this is it*. After all those years of traveling and waiting, all those intricate moments of painstaking field research, it had all been leading up to this evening.

Without the neighbourly comfort of the moon or the stars Aeve was half asleep at the wheel in a matter of seconds whilst great spirits of dirt trailed after her Jeep in the night.



## 2

Even in the depths of winter the heat was simply extraordinary. Aeve stretched into the passenger seat, salvaging a flask which lay in a thin blanket of dust, and gulped down as much as possible. However, thanks to the repetitive landscape and the stifling humidity, Aeve wondered if she’d accidentally picked up a tonic brimming with drugs and sleep-inducing chemicals instead. Keeping her attention fixed on the empty road was then entirely out of the question.

In a hopeless attempt to remain conscious as she drove Aeve took a stock check of her supplies; a cellphone and a useless, scrunched-up jacket sat on the passenger seat next to her and a map was folded neatly on the floor. Alongside the map lay a thick pool of containers, pens, rulers, water bottles and various tools which swirled as the Jeep rocked from one side to the other. Her phone was lightly chirping in amongst this chaos and had bloomed into a rectangle of light: *ten unread messages*. Consequently Aeve’s urge to read them all was overwhelming but she let the feeling pass as best she could, this small dose of confidence and self control being just enough to keep her hands steady at the wheel.

*Eleven unread messages.*

Shaking her head and skim reading a couple of terse messages from Hendrik, she deleted the rest of the notifications with a chain of gestures and swipes. Aeve then threw her phone into the passenger’s foothold where it disappeared beyond the event horizon of a swirling vortex of garbage. More disappointments emerged when she turned back to the road ahead; all the failures which had delayed their work in the past had lined themselves up before her. Tonight it might be a blip in communication she wondered, or possibly the clouds that were hiding above would somehow ruin everything again. Nevertheless it was here that Aeve discovered that she had run another mile in a psychological marathon that always left her feeling exhausted. First it began with anxiety and daydreams of professional disaster, next her thoughts would trot through all the notifications on her phone and highlight that one, particular name that hadn’t popped up.

Amongst the bedlam of screeching tires and wheezing gears she hit the brakes, the Jeep swerving to a halt in the middle of the road. Traces of water had darted along the windscreen and Aeve noticed two solitary droplets, each scuttling towards the outer rim of glass as if they were locked in mortal combat. But as the dust settled there was no sign of rain, or water, or wind, or any hint of the delicate movements of life, even when she killed the engine and climbed onto the seats of the truck for a better view. The sky above was impossible to decipher. In fact the only clear object which Aeve could point out for sure was a star-like entity suspended on the horizon; a fibre of red bulbs were mounted one on top of the other out on the furthest edge of a plateau known as Mount Hombori. Reminiscent of an ordinary cell tower it seemed insignificant from a distance although somehow it was impossible to grow accustom to the twinkling lights as Aeve knew them to be the first of their kind. The beacon was nothing more than a paranormal megastructure that could terraform the earth. As it gently sparkled, each bulb following the other in unison, she recalled how this was only a single tower in an expansive network of relays.

Courtesy of the French military, drums of silver iodide had been torpedoed into the atmosphere and theoretically this would stimulate the growth of cloud cover. The towers on the highest elevations might then conduct their sharp electrical charges and  through this flurry of activity they could, at any time, summon rainstorms at will. It was all highly experimental but at this point the Malian government was desperate to test the most outrageous suggestions, even with what this team had started to call ‘cloud seeding.’ 

Aeve’s meeting with the skeleton crew that manned the station out there on the peak of Mount Hombori had unexpectedly intimidated her; the technology that powered the beacon was unlearnable, omnipotent. In a poorly lit conference room she was struck dumb whilst a team of engineers illustrated how they drew the clouds together to form weather patterns that were predictable, uniform, routine, despite the two hundred and fifty years of parched, cloudless skies which had cursed these lands. Aeve continued to speculate as to how the locals might react to the first synthetic rainclouds—throughout the meeting she couldn’t stop thinking about the people in Timbuktu and Bamako and those in the nearby towns and farms, whole generations that had never seen the rain and those that stood by as strange white men had built this imposing network of towers across their country.

Launching another wave of insults, pleads, and attacks towards the unlit heavens from her Jeep, Aeve compulsively shook with anticipation. As she released this fury, a speck of water trickled along her shoulder and down the length of her arm. *Is this all it took?* she wondered. Is this how easy it was to repair the death and the environmental damage that casually swept through these lands? Forget the beacons and all their magic; did she simply have to stand up in the middle of the desert and hurl profanities at the clouds for them to abandon their relentless cruelty?

Yet another drop, and then another; a gang of them bounced through her hair. Aeve chuckled and leapt up and down as they gathered in number and called for backup. In less than a minute the random drips had formed a torrential downpour, with water spinning around her freckles, bouncing off her nose and collecting at the bottom of the Jeep into a broad, sandy puddle. From a distance Aeve’s dark complexion sparkled against the rain and the incoming mist.

Everything rushed towards the water, now thick and plentiful, in the air; sand, dust, soil, grass, bracken and crickets, all elated that the party could begin. Aeve thought this was like stumbling across a dozen long-lost friends hugging at an airport, or perhaps (uncertain of which metaphor gave her the most comfort) it was like waiting for milk to blend with chocolate in a saucepan since she had long forgotten the pleasure of such wintery delights. The spell broken, the curse lifted; science! It was a once in a lifetime show but Aeve had little time to enjoy the view. There was work to be done, soil to be scooped, research to be compiled for her team. She collapsed into the driver’s seat as the rain ricocheted off the dashboard yet she couldn’t move; Aeve found herself curiously immobilised by a long parade of giggles.



## 3

Her inability to recall the last ten minutes was perhaps the first sign that Aeve shouldn’t have given up on sleep. Those minutes were lost, gone, vanished; she drew a complete blank. The second sign was that Aeve had somehow failed to dress herself properly as she was missing a sock and only had a single arm in her plastic raincoat which limply trailed behind her. Oddly enough, Aeve also noticed that the rain had vanished whilst the skies above had opened to reveal a source of pure, dazzling luminescence at one point or another. Thinking about all this for a moment Aeve came to the steady conclusion that she was no longer driving and she was no longer outside.

As a matter of fact Aeve stood beneath the fluorescent lights of test block 7-A, an open-plan building about the size of a football pitch, separate from the main lab. Rows and columns of waist-high mechanical flowerbeds, bundles of metal and plastic, were humming peacefully all around her. Coffee-coloured trails of soil had been lovingly planted on the top of each rack and through this dirt could be seen black, pencil-thin diamonds piercing the surface. Aeve laced her hand through the batch nearest to her only to detect that this rich carpet of crystal was malleable and gentle to the touch like blades of grass in a field. Indeed, they were related, though this particular genetic strain, which Aeve would prefer to call a *graminoid*, had been manufactured in Amsterdam, Johannesburg, London and Hong Kong. Everything here was synthetic and alien to Mali; the blinding lights above, the soil on her fingertips, not to mention each and every cell inside Aeve’s darling graminoids.

“Howdy, boss!”

Aeve turned to find her intern Katherine Choe heading in her direction and fiddling with something on a small touchscreen. It was clear from the very first moment that Aeve was introduced to Kathy nearly three months ago that she was far too optimistic and easy-going for someone so under-valued, under-paid and over-worked. At every opportunity Kathy would smile her way through the gathering of bar charts and tedious spark lines as well as throughout the long hours of mindless data-entry tasks—it was the kind of work which by now, Aeve imagined, should have broken her spirit at least in some recognisable manner. Kathy mentioned that Hendrik had been urgently looking for her across the lab: “He seemed a little anxious that you weren’t here tonight but I guess that doesn’t matter now though.” At this Kathy seemed to make a little hop in the air. “Isn’t it so exciting!”

“Yeah, I sort of can’t believe it either,” Aeve groaned as she took off her raincoat and passed a hand through her soaking hair. She began questioning Kathy about the developments over the past twelve hours and whether the system was ready for deployment, although there wasn’t even the slightest hint of fatigue in the reply so Aeve asked for a walkie-talkie and an emergency coffee ASAP whilst she walked through the lab, double-checking Kathy’s triple-checking that everything was running smoothly.

Kathy had barely returned with the coffee before Aeve had shot down the boiling liquid and had begun to issue stern commands to the other testing blocks via radio. “At last!” Hendrik’s voice boomed on the other end, interrupting her instructions. “We’ve been looking everywhere for you, come on up to the main lab and explain how the system works. The Minister of Agriculture is here along with the team from the NCU, the SELA and the...” But Aeve interrupted him before he could start name dropping and before he could get carried away with himself; she refused to enter the limelight for even a second. Tonight she was hardly in the mood to watch another bored, bureaucratic face nod along apathetically to her life’s work.

“Fine,” Hendrik muttered after a tense pause.

Aeve felt little remorse about shutting down the conversation like this since his political ambitions were threatening her work. If a test failed on live TV, those cameras and journalists that her esteemed colleague Dr. Hendrik Botha had revealed like a magic trick, those hungry vultures, would descend upon them and snap at their failures mercilessly. This might risk their next round of funding and so for Hendrik to hype the evening into a fever pitch amongst members of the press was foolish and maybe even dangerous. In a meeting with him the week before Aeve hoped to cancel the event and preserve their research until it was rock solid, this would at least keep their failures private for the time being. But leaving his office, Aeve glimpsed a smirk beneath his fuzzy grey beard; he had simply ignored her request.

A roar of electronic whistles appeared to be coming from every corner of the facility as an orange light swirled across the racks and the fluorescents dimmed. Aeve and Kathy walked towards the nearest exit where the sound was overridden by a voice which rose softly into the air: “Warning. Labs three and seven will now commence the procedure. T-minus five minutes.” They zipped up their plastic raincoats, pulled up their hoods and took a final look at the racks in front of them by which time the sudden, constant beeping in the lab was quickly swept up by the distant thud of rain outside.

“Five...four...” Aeve turned to Kathy, smiling, and they fist bumped. “Three...” Before them the racks descended as the grass was gently placed into the earth. “Two...one...standby,” the voice called out. Sheets of water filled every gap in the surrounding air whilst the outer skeleton of the lab was cast off like a crustacean abandoning its home. At the same moment tiny, whirring gears could be heard from the lights that were splitting apart and being packed neatly aside as a set of wheels extended from beneath the walls, moving them all away. On command the white metal frames of the ceiling had been replaced with a patchwork of stars which were now covered by intermittent clouds so that Aeve and Kathy were teleported to an alien world where together, swaying gently in between sporadic gasps of wind, crystals of charcoal now dotted the landscape; the two appeared to be grinning so intensely that it looked as if they might inflict serious, long lasting damage to their cheekbones.

“You know what it reminds me of?” Aeve raised her voice over the movements of the lab’s components which were slowly packing themselves up into a fine sheet and could be heard rolling back towards the main lab. “When I was in high school we played these real time strategy games where you built factories, or harvested fields of wheat and barley with a single gesture. Click, and boom! A thousand soldiers, a dozen tanks, or a fleet of starship destroyers were then yours to command.”

“I know what you mean!” Kathy laughed in response. “I spent literally every waking moment as a kid playing *Command and Conquer* at home.” Towards the centre of the compound behind them giant oblong bubbles of plastic clasped the earth, each illuminated by its own strange colour. Fluorescent orange and blue, electric sparks of red, green and white, the main lab was a gleaming, bubbling heart of bright neon shadows enclosed by hundreds of miles of suffocating gloom. “You know that I backpacked around Berlin last year, right?” Kathy continued in amongst her smiles. “Well, in Kreuzberg there were these graffiti artists who were climbing on the sides of buildings. They were painting murals that were five or maybe even six stories tall and so now looking at this I think it sort of looks like we just tagged the desert.” *No kidding*, Aeve thought, looking on the field as if it had been spray-painted by an anti-horticultural thug. “We’re tagging seventeen of these tonight,” she whispered under her breath in disbelief.

“Right? So this is some kind of world record, I guess,” Kathy acknowledged. “The largest display of Saharan graffiti ever.”

“Saharan Graffiti is my favourite R.E.M. album by the way,” Aeve smirked and poked Kathy with her elbow, nodding in the direction of a similar contraption about half a kilometre to the east which was in the process of revealing another synthetic field. Cheers and applause erupted from the radio, which cut off the brief moment of silence, however Aeve was fixed to the spot; she couldn’t head back to the lab and celebrate with Kathy and the rest of the team just yet.

It was too easy as this was merely the visible, early stages of the project, the freeze frame that would show up on the news and the bit that would be linked to, favourited and retweeted. This was the moment that everyone would point to because building something tangible was easier to remember, Aeve thought. The tricky part though is maintaining what you’ve built; the real difficulty lies in keeping up the momentum to finish the job, rather than backing out at the first sign of an easy win. Aeve knew that all the gruelling work that no-one would care about still lay ahead. Although that’s what science ultimately is, she knew, beyond all the clichés; science wasn’t the eureka moment in the bathtub, it was the fifty years of unrecorded tedium and monotony that led up to the breakthrough.

Aeve was perfectly aware that her work had just begun, but for now; sleep.



## 4 

She was saving the world. At least that’s the impression that Aeve gave her father whenever words such as ‘cyanobacteria’, ‘genetic mutation’ or ‘organelle’ slipped out in conversation, these being the H-bombs in her weaponised arsenal of conversation killers. Ultimately it was far easier for her father to pretend, much like he had with Aeve’s mother, that her job was part scientist, part eco-warrior and part Wonder Woman, than it was to truly understand what that work involved.

“Hi,” Aeve would often begin struggling, flailing, hoping desperately to explain at a party or on a date. What was it precisely that she did for a living? It was difficult, stressful even, to talk with people that weren’t biologists, or with strangers that had never heard of the Sahel, or with angry landlords that couldn’t tell their forbs from their graminoids, or with childhood friends that were incapable of pointing to the capital of Ethiopia on a map of the world. “I’m a geneticist, and so, well...” Aeve would trip over her tongue. “I guess I build plants for a living.” Date-guy would always get a minus point if he let this vague, immediate answer fulfil his curiosity. “Most of the time I work at the Millennium Seed Bank at Kew Gardens just around the corner, that’s where I research the genetic structures of the million or so plants that they archive and with whatever data is available I try to solve some really interesting problems. Mostly these are agricultural or environmental issues and lately I’ve been working with an international research team for the first time which, to be honest, is quite scary.”

This was the key moment for date-guy, because it’s here that Aeve would be inextricably propelled by her own excitement—curiosity would lead her off to plants and ecosystems, then to fossilised vegetation in different parts of the world, or instead she’d move on to foreign habitats and environmental sustainability before finally grappling with the moral arguments challenging her work in genetics.

Aeve continued: “Have you ever heard of the Sahel by any chance?”

Date guy: “Nope.”

“Okay,” Aeve would begin, her eyes twirling in the dim restaurant lights. “The Sahelian Kingdom is a thin stretch of land that criss-crosses Africa, from Mauritania in the west right across Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan and out towards Eritrea. It spreads across the entire continent and it ends up in the Red Sea, but the important thing to remember is that this strip of land acts as a natural barrier from the jungles in the south of Africa to the deserts in the north. What’s terrifying is that every country on either side of this border is being quickly gobbled up by the approaching Sahara.”

Three date-guys had managed to reach this point in the conversation.

“It’s a process known as desertification. Land erosion, poor agriculture and all sorts of other problems have led to environmental devastation on a scale that’s almost unimaginable. But it’s not just a cause for hippies to get angsty about and it’s not just another capital-M ‘Movement’ for them to fly their flags under. It’s a life-and-death situation for the people trying to make a living out there. And so, if they can no longer grow crops or sustain infrastructure like roads, hospitals, schools, you name it, then we’ll watch as millions of people migrate to the south. Then we’ll know it’s over—we’ll have finally ravaged the last bit of wildlife on our planet.”

Two date-guys had recently struck out around this point, one of them glancing around the restaurant unenthusiastically before staring directly at her chest. Neither had any hope to contribute to the discussion, but Aeve was familiar with getting excited about an idea and watching the person before her squirm uncomfortably with boredom. This certainly didn’t stop her from trying, on the contrary, their lack of interest was a catalyst as Aeve wanted to win them over and teach them at least a small bit about the fascinating world of genetics.

“The African Union and the U.N. have finally started to notice just how important this problem is, so after my work is finished here in London I’ll be joining a team in Mali to research effective ways to stop that process.” Aeve would swirl the wine in her glass, prod the table at certain intermissions and try to draw countries and municipalities in the air to clarify her ideas. Whenever she talked about her job Aeve felt as if she was a broken record, but one that broke on her favourite verse of her favourite song and now it would loop indefinitely forever.

Only one date-guy had exhausted Aeve’s imagination up to this point, donating to her rambling diatribes with questions, jokes and, at all the right moments, giving her serious looks of discomfort. Afterwards they headed to a bar where a group had cloistered themselves around a ping pong table in a cellar and it was here that they played a wonderful, eclectic drinking game. “Ping!” Aeve would shout as date-guy drunkenly hit the ping pong ball across the room. It was an evening where strangers became friends serendipitously, conversations flowing together like they were being read off a script. “Pong!” He’d return in kind as Aeve’s serve hit the net and she’d wash away the embarrassment with another gulp of liquid from a tiny glass.

Date-guy was British, funny and best of all, he had the easiest smile Aeve had ever found. Over the coming months she knew that she wanted to hold onto the sails of his unrelenting, full-bodied laughter, safeguarding each and every moment in a glassy bottle. With her own hands Aeve would build a storehouse to keep these bottles safe, as they’d need to be catalogued by time, place and origin so future archivists could plunder the treasures of his every indistinguishable laugh and his every fleeting smile.


## 5

If you happen to find yourself at the bottom of a dark, enclosed stairwell after crossing through a string of corridors which now snake far behind you, and above, in thin, elegant capital letters a sign reads: THE FUNGARIUM, then prepare to be greeted inexplicably by a warehouse packed to the rafters with countless boxes, each of them a peculiar shade of fern-green and tagged with a label describing the contents inside. Lifting them from their resting place you’ll want to shake them like presents but you must, at all costs, avoid such rabid temptations.

This was how Aeve’s introductory tour of the centre of mycology at Kew Gardens began, led by one of her mother’s old friends, Dr. Jane Bower, an elderly, rotund and bespectacled researcher who also happened to be the Principal Mycologist at the Fungarium. Whenever questioned about her unusual work she would smile, remove her glasses and jovially reply (often loudly): “I am merely a humble admirer, a confidant, a familial chum to all fungi, both large and little.” Naturally Dr. Bower was the perfect tour guide; her eccentric hop from one green package to another would frequently introduce a story or myth which she’d then unwrap along with all the innards of the boxes and their contents of dried fungi. And so it was that after passing beneath the fragile, uppercase letters of the sign above the doorway, Aeve recognised an almost child-like energy coursing through her veins, as if suddenly dropped into Disneyland only to find that above all the pursuits of life there was no greater pleasure than working alongside Goofy and Daffy Duck; to put it simply, Aeve wanted to work, sleep and play amongst the mushrooms.

“*Armillaria solidipes!*” Dr. Bower cried, reading the Latin enchantment on the box aloud whilst unlocking it with a swift click. A rotten, pungent aroma inexplicably burst into their nostrils as she explained that this was a specimen from the Humongous Fungus; dwarfing the blue whale, related to neither plant nor animal, this mushroom colony had been ranked by the scientific community as the largest organism on Earth. For more than two millennia they had been spreading like wildfire across the Atlantic, specifically throughout national parks in Oregon, almost invisible from naturalists and biologists alike. They slept for much of the year in the undergrowth deep in the soil until brown caps erupted from their resting grounds later in the spring.
 
Without these mycological specimens the natural ecosystem could not sustain Aeve’s world of plants, Jane teased, and regardless, the number of individual mushroom species outnumbered plants six-to-one. Therefore much of her work involved naming this growing catalogue of species, in fact it was Dr. Jane Bower who had correctly renamed the *Armillaria solidepes* from the incomprehensible name it had been falsely categorised under so many years before. Throwing aside the tributes she received from this discovery, Jane would often mutter that naming mushrooms was difficult work simply because there were so many mushrooms left to name. “The problem is that there are more specimens of fungi than there are words in the Latin dictionary,” she would often say.

It was here at the Fungarium that Aeve would find adoptive parents for her graminoids whilst she worked at the Millennium Seed Bank across the road. One of many secret facilities at Kew Gardens, the Seed Bank had originally been designed as a safe-haven for biologists studying the origins of flora, later more than a billion seeds and about ten percent of all species would soon be archived on the premises. During Aeve’s research the Seed Bank slowly became a biological vanguard, fortified against nuclear holocaust and other such world-ending calamities; it was a Fort Knox overflowing with DNA instead of gold.

Examining the genetic structures of every recorded seed on Earth had left Aeve with infrequent moments of spare time, moments in which she would often wonder how her life had started to overflow with mushrooms and seeds and underground bunkers. Even in her dreams there was no escape from her work; in one violent, recurring nightmare Aeve surfaced from a crowded strip club where bouncing strings of DNA gyrated hypnotically along the dance poles. A double helix would bend over and Aeve always tucked a hundred dollar bill into its G string before she woke up with a start. Why was she at a grimy strip club though, she wondered. Why would a piece of DNA be wearing see-through underwear? What were they hiding? Why was she using dollars instead of pounds? And why oh why did these human-sized DNA molecules continue to dance whilst she screamed?

Out of this mumbling confusion the strangeness of her dreams would sometimes lead her back to her office at night. Although this particular evening it was impossible to concentrate in front of the microscope or in front of her laptop whilst London’s persistent storm beat its way along the windows. Aeve’s lack of focus was partly to blame on the sincerity of her desires as she wished for nothing more than to wake her friends in the middle of the night and whisper into their ears her love song of *Mali, the Sahel, a kingdom of graminoids*. Through this work Aeve also wanted desperately to impress Dr. Jane Bower in some vain attempt to commune with the dead—by the way of her mother’s friend she wanted to glimpse some lasting remnant of the first African-American biologist who had fought so viciously to break down the old boys club, only to pioneer Aeve’s inherited field of genetics from the inside out. Jane was a witness of some kind, a medium or vessel through which Aeve could gain access to her mother’s relentless courage.

The lack of rainfall, the terminal state of erosion and the scale of the rapidly expanding desert in Mali had been reported in a folder of documents which lay scattered across her desk. Every attempt to solve the problem had failed spectacularly, the latest theory involved modifying a specimen to peak physical strength or to ensure it survived under deteriorating and extreme desert conditions. There must be another solution, Aeve convinced herself as she paced the room. Donning a thick blue coat and gloves she burst through a series of metal doorways in between her office and the lab into what was commonly referred to as ‘The Vault’—this was the repository of seeds, a warehouse-lab similar to the Fungarium, only it was chilled to a brisk minus twenty below zero. Cryogenically frozen and protected from the outside world by plastic, transparent containers with screw-on tops, each unique specimen was held along with thousands of identical copies ready on demand; from pine nuts and Mexican pinyons to sunflowers, ginkgoes, cycads, junipers and, amongst her favourites, monkey-puzzle seeds.

Searching through this embryonic archive Aeve couldn’t help but obsess over these dormant embryos and what would happen if you combined them together. Could you pull a new family of living creatures from this primordial broth? Perhaps by mixing these organisms in a text editor their genetic instructions could be made visible on a screen. These were the sort of questions that haunted her daily schedule. Aeve remembered the Humongous Fungus and recalled how Jane had thrust apart its guts to reveal throbbing white veins. “See, we think of a fungi as the mushroom, but that’s just the flower,” she had said. “This network of branching filaments underneath is the real deal, that’s the network that powers the fungi right there. And on top of this network, well...we call it the  *mycelium*, many dead forests lie beneath the surface and the upper layers only succeed because of these ancestors that once breathed life into the soil—so the mycelium is the organic material of the fungi, these tendril projections right here. This is what converts death into life.”

If you took the mycelium of a mushroom and bolted it onto a graminoid, like those blades of grass in a field, what sort of plant would return from this biological potion? They had been tackling the issue from the wrong angle this whole time, the plant’s genetics had never been at fault! What was required was a cross-species hop between the graminoids and the fungi—why hadn’t she thought of this before?

Heavy, visible puffs of air floated around the room as Aeve continued to pace up and down the aisles with escalating speed, her mind a swirl of genetic formulas and queries. A passerby might see the Vault as nothing more than an impressive library of seeds but Aeve knew it to be something else; it was a repository of billions upon billions of lines of code, they were codes in a language that she could only barely read, but they were codes nonetheless, and the further she paced down the aisles the more decipherable the letters in this codebase became.


## 6

Smudged together into a vast homogenous blob their days had passed-by without seasonal changes or diverse weather patterns to ease the boredom. Despite the rolling undercurrent of dust that would sweep predictably across the surface and rake the earth in a sickly poison, Aeve had never expected that such hostility could weave itself into everyday moments of life and consequently just how tedious those dangers could become. All that was left was to count the little scars and scratches that accumulated on her body, the leftover traces from a day spent in the topsoil amongst these odd synthetic plants; a powdery soot-like residue would cake her boots, shorts and forehead, an assortment of bruises would run from her knees up to Aeve’s elbows whilst cuts on the tips of her fingers would sometimes cause them to feel bloated or swollen. Aeve had familiarised herself with this kind of work before, however Kathy would always gather a more savage inventory of wounds. Laying back in the field her intern watched as a sticky, unpleasant dusk fell over the main lab and she groaned whilst she rubbed the sores on her ankles.

Next to her, Aeve had been preoccupied with both hands in the soil. She yanked at the turf to reveal a peculiar string of biological circuitry where thread-like, pinky fingers of mycelium stretched out wide to connect one blade of grass to the rest of the network. She decided to take a closer look by withdrawing a scruffy, beaten-up tablet from her backpack and checking the app which she had designed to thrive on this meal of rich, biological information as researchers patrolling the grief-stricken meadows nearby started to contribute to the data set too. Sadly, over the past fortnight their problems had been driven to the surface so that anyone could bear witness to their failures; yellow and sickly, even from a distance, bald spots were openly visible in the pastures.

Aeve’s design was falling in between the tips of her fingers. Of seventeen crops thirteen had drowned beneath sandy tidal forces. Although ecological systems are fantastically complex and complex systems often fail, Aeve chanted. What’s required is more focus and concentration, replace the distractions. She could fix this, she told Kathy as they hiked across the fields, just mute all the noise and she could heal this place. Kathy had subsequently positioned herself in between the outside world and her mentor, subjecting herself to a torrent of emails, text messages and phone calls that could often be heard as muted pleads outside the lab or in the fields, conversations in which she begged journalists and editors to hold their embarrassing stories about the latest developments in the lab.

Exhausted, Aeve slumped down next to Kathy and followed her gaze over to Mt Hombori far off in the distance, its tower perched on the edge of the plateau like a matchstick. Disappointment had set in as Aeve had hoped to find that the beacon would occasionally fling bolts of lightning into the air just as she had observed in her favourite sci-fi movies, but no such luck; it’s commands, like any piece of crucial infrastructure, were always hushed and tranquil. Aeve would have to learn the codes, read the skies and connect this tower in the horizon with the organic structures that she had designed, but regardless of the difficulty of this task, the prospect of failure no longer worried her. Instead Aeve had begun to obsess over Mali itself and how it would never look the same; as a biologist she knew that the slightest changes in the environment might have startling unforeseen consequences: “Everything is dependent on certain temperatures or landscapes, certain difficulties for life to flourish,” her mother had once said.

The prolonged Saharan evenings would cause these harmless daydreams to slip in and out of Aeve’s waking moments, too. On many occasions she imagined a paddle volleying the sun away, hurtling this ping-pong ball of flaming hydrogen back in the direction of date-guy’s apartment. She started to message him with *ping* during these moments at the end of the day and a couple of hours later he’d reply with *pong* in kind. This interstellar ping pong match became a cute tradition of theirs which consoled them whenever they wanted to stay in touch but didn’t feel like talking. Receiving one of these short-burst messages was unspeakably intimate; the knowledge that someone loved her on another continent was enough to kindle a smile under any circumstances, so whilst Hendrik rambled in the canteen or during her tests in the fields outside, Aeve would let those infrequent messages calm her fragile nerves.

Once her work was finished there might be a couple that would build their homes on this very plain, she thought, whilst perhaps a new city might plant itself amongst the fields. Overlooking the same landscape, the inhabitants would find jungles instead of a rolling, desert tundra and rather than ping pong these lovers would send messages and play games in a dialect which Aeve couldn’t possibly hope to understand. Much like their own signals, these romantic communiqués might, in time, become active beacons of love in their own right. Aeve liked to think that she was building a test bed where these games could be invented, a place where they might spread and where others might design their own secret letters and valentine ciphers, bits of information which only a single organism in the entire universe might decode. These insignificant messages might then grow into a slice of a private network in which two lonely people tried their best to haul a thousand miles of dust and empty space an inch closer together.

At any time it was possible to scroll through pictures of him in Laos or Frankfurt or Chicago. Aeve intercepted messages, in-between conversations of mutual friends where they had caught up over breakfast or drinks. During these moments an insatiable desire to move would overwhelm her whether that was jogging, cycling, weight-lifting, whatever physical activity might best help her counteract this desire to communicate. He hadn’t replied to her messages for a couple of days and now she was beginning to worry as their cute, short-lived tradition had reframed the distant galaxy of stars and planets above, his messages had jumbled them all up. They made an uninhabitable wasteland seem almost comical, as if she could roll the pregnant stars (now joined by clouds that flirted in the wind) into a galactic dough ball which might be kept safe in her pocket or which she might lose behind her bedside cabinet. Yet the longer he didn’t reply the larger, the more isolated that space felt. Aeve watched the planets spin on their carousel and for a short, panicked moment she was a witness to the empty volume between things and gasped as the darkness of intergalactic space grew mean and wicked. 

Sometimes these dusk-dreams would bump into one another so that Aeve couldn’t tell which Mali she would occupy the next morning. First there was the cruel, war-torn country inhabited by French soldiers and Taureg rebels, deadly enemies that crept through the fields in search of one another. Then there was the Mali of Music where Tinariwen, Ali Farka Touré and Rokia Traoré strummed their guitars and their harp-like kora and danced beneath the Mali of Stars, where a cloudless, luminescent realm bathed itself in supernovae. Of course it was impossible to forget the thirteenth century Mali too, a forgotten Empire of tribes known as the Manden Kurufaba which, emerging from harvests of copper and salt, had flourished beneath a younger Mali of Stars. So which of these dreams was Aeve trespassing through now? 

As a Hyphenated-American, an African-American-Woman, Aeve knew that these punctuation marks concealed rich, complex worlds that were easily lost in amongst the stereotypes; the hyphens relieve us of an intellectual burden and let us skim over the world like a stone darting across a pool. *Music-Mali, War-torn-Mali, Ancient-Mali.* Aeve was skimming over them just as thoughtlessly as those that had darted over the punctuation marks in her own genetic makeup, but no longer. As best she could, Aeve would take her time and replace each of these versions of Mali with a face, with a sunset, with another solid projection or framework, compressing the space between these words in the hope that she might alleviate Mali of its hyphens.

